So in the previous section we installed WordPress.
And then we added some plugins and some dummy data. During the course we'll use these plugins and these
dummy content we imported.
But for now let's discuss some important aspects about WordPress.
And these are templates, the loop and functions.
So the word template can be used in different contexts in WordPress. So it can refer to template files
which are files in your theme that construct the markup for your WordPress pages. And we also have template
tags which are functions that are used to pull another file or some data from the database. And template
hierarchy which refers to the logic that WordPress uses in order to decide which template file to use
depending on your requested URL.
And finally we have page templates. And we will discuss this later in the course.
So as I mentioned before index.php is the only template required for a WordPress theme. And we'll see why
in a moment.
So templates can be embedded in other templates and that's to either organize your code into smaller
parts or when you have pieces of code that will be used in multiple templates. These kinds of templates
are called template partials.
So for example you can have a header template and the footer template and a sidebar. And these template will
be used in multiple places in the theme.
And so to pull these templates in the main template we use template tags. We have some predefined template
tags like get_header() which will pull a file called header.php and get_footer() which will pull a file
called footer.php.
And of course get_sidebar().
There are also functions like get_search_form() which will get a search form template. And you can actually
create your own templates and include them using a function called get_template_part(). And we'll use this
function a lot throughout this course. So let's see how that will look like in code.
So first make sure you have your MAMP server started and then open your browser on the URL of your project.
So right now we have our hardcoded dummy text here.
So let's try and make this more dynamic.
So the HTML tag and the HEAD tag and the BODY tag and the closing BODY and HTML tags will be included
throughout the whole website, right?
So let's now create two template parts for the header and the folder and include them in the index.php.
So now I'm gonna cut the upper part of the index.php and put it in header.php. And let's go back
now to index.php and include the header file using the template tag get_header().
And let's do the same thing
now for the footer. So let's call the function or the template tag get_footer()  to get a file called footer.php
that we will create in a moment.
So let's now create the footer.php file.
And then put the closing tags.
One quick note here.
If your theme for example has multiple headers maybe different styles different markup, you can create
another file in your theme header-something and then in the get_header() function it accepts an argument
which will be this something.
So for example in index.php if we added a parameter "vertical" to the get_header() function then we can create
a header-vertical.php file in our theme. And that will be used instead of the header.php. Another
thing you may have noticed that my text editor auto completes the WordPress functions. And that's because I
am using a Visual Studio  Code extension for that.
So if you're not using Visual Studio Code, you'll probably find something similar for your text editor.
So I really recommend using one of these.
It will be quite helpful.
So let's go back now to the browser
and make sure what we've done is actually working.
So I'm gonna refresh and right click and View Page Source. And as you can see we still have our header and
footer.
So we've reached the good point now in our theme. However we still have a problem in our header.
We have some hardcoded data like the language attributes and the language can actually be changed from
the WordPress backend. So WordPress provides  a function called language_attributes() and this function will add
the language attribute to the HTML tag dynamically.
Another dynamic attribute in the header is the charset.
A charset can also be changed from the WordPress backend.
And for this we use another template called bloginfo(). bloginfo() will get some information about your
blog.
So inside PHP tags
let's now call bloginfo().
And then it accepts a parameter and this parameter is the information that we need to get about a blog.
So in our case it's "charset". Finally we have the TITLE tag. The TITLE tag also needs to be dynamic.
And for this one we use a function called wp_head(). The wp_head() function
does not only add the TITLE tag, it adds actually anything that you want to add inside the HEAD tag.
So if you for example want to add a STYLESHEET tag in the HEAD tag you won't just hardcode it in the
HEAD tag. You'll somehow use the wp_head() function to inject your STYLESHEET tag in the HEAD tag.
And we'll see how to do that later.
But for now let's go to the footer.php.
And likewise we have a function called wp_footer(). And this function will also be used to add anything
you need to add in the footer. So let's say you need to add a SCRIPT tag in the footer,
you will also not just hardcode the SCRIPT tag in the footer.php but you'll somehow use wp_footer() function.
So let's now go back to the browser and view the source and let's see what these functions have done.
So as you can see the wp_head() and wp_footer() functions added some styles and some scripts
in the header and in the footer.
So basically WordPress used wp_head() and wp_footer() functions to load some styles
and scripts that it needs to run your website.
And as we progress in this course we will see how to use these functions to add our own styles and scripts
as well.
So we've seen how to use template tags like get_header() and get_footer() to pull another file into our template.
We also used the bloginfo() which is used to pull some information about your blog from the database and
not just pull another file like get_header() and get_footer().
You also have other examples of template tags that get information from the database like the title and
the content.
And these ones are used to get the title and the content of a blog post.
So imagine we have some posts here in index.php. We can use these tags to get information about each post.
But how do these tags know which post title and content to get?
They must be placed inside the loop. So let's see what the loop means in the next lecture.